README.md, before:

[![Clojars Project](https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/insn.svg)](https://clojars.org/insn)
[![](https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/workflows/Test%20runner/badge.svg)][ci]

### Dependency and version information
<details>
  <summary>Click to show</summary>

> :warning: This library uses a recent version of [`asm`][asm-jar] which can cause dependency issues. [See here][asm-ver] for more.

[Leiningen][lein]

``` clojure
[insn "0.5.4"]
```

[tools.deps][deps]

```clojure
{insn/insn {:mvn/version "0.5.4"}}
```

[Maven][maven]

``` xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>insn</groupId>
  <artifactId>insn</artifactId>
  <version>0.5.4</version>
</dependency>
```

LTS JDK versions 8, 11, 17 and 21 along with Clojure versions 1.7 to 1.12 are currently [tested against][ci].
</details>

### What is it?

This library provides a functional abstraction over [ASM][asm] for generating JVM bytecode. ASM is the library that Clojure itself uses to dynamically compile Clojure code into code that can be run on the JVM.

### Quick start

Let's begin by creating a simple class, equivalent to the following Java code.

```java
package my.pkg;

public class Adder {
    public static int VALUE = 42;
    public long add (int n) {
        return (long) (VALUE + n);
    }
}
```

The class is specified as a map. The class fields and methods are sequences of maps giving the members of said class.

```clojure
(def class-data
  {:name 'my.pkg.Adder
   :fields [{:flags #{:public :static}, :name "VALUE", :type :int, :value 42}]
   :methods [{:flags #{:public}, :name "add", :desc [:int :long]
              :emit [[:getstatic :this "VALUE" :int]
                     [:iload 1]
                     [:iadd]
                     [:i2l]
                     [:lreturn]]}]})
```

Above, we described in data the same information expressed by the Java code, except the method body was given as a sequence of bytecode instructions. (Note: unlike Java, the method return value is specified via the `:desc` key as the last element). If you aren't fluent in JVM bytecode instruction syntax, I would suggest reading chapter 3 of the excellent tutorial pdf from the ASM [site][pdf].

`:emit` can also be a fn that is passed the ASM `MethodVisitor` object to write the method bytecode as shown in [this example][emitfn].

Now to write the bytecode.

```clojure
(require '[insn.core :as insn])

(def result (insn/visit class-data))
```

The `result` is a map containing the generated class's packaged-prefixed `:name` and `:bytes`, the latter being a byte array. This information is all you need to give to a ClassLoader to define your class.

For convenience, we can use `insn.core/define` to define the class for us.

```clojure
(def class-object (insn/define class-data)) ;; => my.pkg.Adder
(-> class-object .newInstance (.add 17))    ;; => 59
```

Note that you can also pass `result` to `define`, the class will not be regenerated. Also note, like Java, since we did not define any constructors, a public no-argument constructor that simply calls the superclass constructor was generated for us.

If you are evaluating the code snippets above in the REPL, you can also just do:

```clojure
(.add (my.pkg.Adder.) 17) ;; => 59
```

Since, by default, `define` loads the class using Clojure's own `DynamicClassLoader`, meaning the class will be *first class* to subsequent evaluations in the running Clojure environment.

### More information

For additional usage examples and topics, see the [wiki][wiki]. For a complete reference, see the [docs][doc]. The fairly comprehensive [test suite][tests] is also demonstrative and should be easy to follow.

### Running the tests

```bash
lein test
```

Or, `lein test-all` for all supported Clojure versions.

### Similar libraries

  - [tools.emitter.jvm](https://github.com/clojure/tools.emitter.jvm)
    * Does not provide a general ASM API.
  - [mage](https://github.com/nasser/mage) and [magic](https://github.com/nasser/magic)
    * Clojure-CLR only.

### Projects using insn

  - [tech.datatype](https://github.com/techascent/tech.datatype)
    * Efficient N-dimensional numerics across a range of primitive datatypes and containers.
    * Also used by this libraries' successor, [dtype-next](https://github.com/cnuernber/dtype-next).
  - [jmh-clojure](https://github.com/jgpc42/jmh-clojure)
    * Clojure bridge to JMH benchmarking via bytecode generation.

### License

Copyright © 2017-2025 Justin Conklin

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License, the same as Clojure.



[asm]:         http://asm.ow2.org
[asm-jar]:     https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.ow2.asm/asm
[asm-ver]:     https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/wiki/Dependency-Problems
[ci]:          https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/blob/master/.github/workflows/test.yml
[deps]:        https://github.com/clojure/tools.deps.alpha
[doc]:         https://jgpc42.github.io/insn/doc
[docker]:      https://www.docker.com
[emitfn]:      https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/wiki/Interface-Implementation
[lein]:        http://github.com/technomancy/leiningen
[maven]:       http://maven.apache.org
[pdf]:         https://asm.ow2.io/asm4-guide.pdf
[tests]:       https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/blob/master/test/insn/core_test.clj
[wiki]:        https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/wiki

Commit message:

improve :params and return :type handling

README.md, after:

[![Clojars Project](https://img.shields.io/clojars/v/insn.svg)](https://clojars.org/insn)
[![](https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/workflows/Test%20runner/badge.svg)][ci]

### Dependency and version information
<details>
  <summary>Click to show</summary>

> :warning: This library uses a recent version of [`asm`][asm-jar] which can cause dependency issues. [See here][asm-ver] for more.

[Leiningen][lein]

``` clojure
[insn "0.5.4"]
```

[tools.deps][deps]

```clojure
{insn/insn {:mvn/version "0.5.4"}}
```

[Maven][maven]

``` xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>insn</groupId>
  <artifactId>insn</artifactId>
  <version>0.5.4</version>
</dependency>
```

LTS JDK versions 8, 11, 17 and 21 along with Clojure versions 1.7 to 1.12 are currently [tested against][ci].
</details>

### What is it?

This library provides a functional abstraction over [ASM][asm] for generating JVM bytecode. ASM is the library that Clojure itself uses to dynamically compile Clojure code into code that can be run on the JVM.

### Quick start

Let's begin by creating a simple class, equivalent to the following Java code.

```java
package my.pkg;

public class Adder {
    public static int VALUE = 42;
    public long add (int n) {
        return (long) (VALUE + n);
    }
}
```

The class is specified as a map. The class fields and methods are sequences of maps giving the members of said class.

```clojure
(def class-data
  {:name 'my.pkg.Adder
   :fields [{:flags #{:public :static}, :name "VALUE", :type :int, :value 42}]
   :methods [{:flags #{:public}, :name "add", :desc [:int :long]
              :emit [[:getstatic :this "VALUE" :int]
                     [:iload 1]
                     [:iadd]
                     [:i2l]
                     [:lreturn]]}]})
```

Above, we described in data the same information expressed by the Java code, except the method body was given as a sequence of bytecode instructions. (Note: unlike Java, the method return value is specified via the `:desc` key as the last element). If you aren't fluent in JVM bytecode instruction syntax, I would suggest reading chapter 3 of the excellent tutorial pdf from the ASM [site][pdf].

> As of version 0.6.0, passing the :params and return :type separately is also supported.

`:emit` can also be a fn that is passed the ASM `MethodVisitor` object to write the method bytecode as shown in [this example][emitfn].

Now to write the bytecode.

```clojure
(require '[insn.core :as insn])

(def result (insn/visit class-data))
```

The `result` is a map containing the generated class's packaged-prefixed `:name` and `:bytes`, the latter being a byte array. This information is all you need to give to a ClassLoader to define your class.

For convenience, we can use `insn.core/define` to define the class for us.

```clojure
(def class-object (insn/define class-data)) ;; => my.pkg.Adder
(-> class-object .newInstance (.add 17))    ;; => 59
```

Note that you can also pass `result` to `define`, the class will not be regenerated. Also note, like Java, since we did not define any constructors, a public no-argument constructor that simply calls the superclass constructor was generated for us.

If you are evaluating the code snippets above in the REPL, you can also just do:

```clojure
(.add (my.pkg.Adder.) 17) ;; => 59
```

Since, by default, `define` loads the class using Clojure's own `DynamicClassLoader`, meaning the class will be *first class* to subsequent evaluations in the running Clojure environment.

### More information

For additional usage examples and topics, see the [wiki][wiki]. For a complete reference, see the [docs][doc]. The fairly comprehensive [test suite][tests] is also demonstrative and should be easy to follow.

### Running the tests

```bash
lein test
```

Or, `lein test-all` for all supported Clojure versions.

### Similar libraries

  - [tools.emitter.jvm](https://github.com/clojure/tools.emitter.jvm)
    * Does not provide a general ASM API.
  - [mage](https://github.com/nasser/mage) and [magic](https://github.com/nasser/magic)
    * Clojure-CLR only.

### Projects using insn

  - [tech.datatype](https://github.com/techascent/tech.datatype)
    * Efficient N-dimensional numerics across a range of primitive datatypes and containers.
    * Also used by this libraries' successor, [dtype-next](https://github.com/cnuernber/dtype-next).
  - [jmh-clojure](https://github.com/jgpc42/jmh-clojure)
    * Clojure bridge to JMH benchmarking via bytecode generation.

### License

Copyright © 2017-2025 Justin Conklin

Distributed under the Eclipse Public License, the same as Clojure.



[asm]:         http://asm.ow2.org
[asm-jar]:     https://mvnrepository.com/artifact/org.ow2.asm/asm
[asm-ver]:     https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/wiki/Dependency-Problems
[ci]:          https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/blob/master/.github/workflows/test.yml
[deps]:        https://github.com/clojure/tools.deps.alpha
[doc]:         https://jgpc42.github.io/insn/doc
[docker]:      https://www.docker.com
[emitfn]:      https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/wiki/Interface-Implementation
[lein]:        http://github.com/technomancy/leiningen
[maven]:       http://maven.apache.org
[pdf]:         https://asm.ow2.io/asm4-guide.pdf
[tests]:       https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/blob/master/test/insn/core_test.clj
[wiki]:        https://github.com/jgpc42/insn/wiki
